I tried my first experiment, which as usually for first experiments, was mostly a failure.
I have an old map light thing I got from American Science and Surplus a long time ago, back with it was still called Jerryco.
(Loved that catalog and always ended up buying lots of things that sounded cool and seemed cheap, until you added it all up!)
It was obviously someone’s great idea that failed.
It consists of a piece of plexiglass with some edge lights connected to a car cigarette lighter power plug.
You were supposed to put your map under the plexiglass to light it up.
Anyway, this is very close to what I was thinking of using to create a controllable ganzfeld next to the person’s eyes while still allowing them to view a screen at a distance.
First thing I noticed is that when you put the plexiglass up to your eyes, not very much light comes out of it.
It seems most of the light is going straight through the glass and coming out the other edge.
Duhhh.  Why should photons come out the surface?  They like to go in a straight line!
Maybe this is why this wonderful invention ended up at the surplus center.
I guess the inventor and I both had some fundamental misconceptions.
The second thing I noticed was that even with the plexiglass close to my eyes I could still see the blurry imperfections in the surface (of which there were many).
I had assumed that something that close to the eyes would be invisible, just like when you take a picture through a screen.
However, the eye must have a much greater depth of field than most camera lenses.
So already there are 2 strikes on me and I haven’t even started the experiment.
Determined to try anyway, I put a piece of paper behind the plexiglass, stuck the thing on my face, loaded up white noise app on my phone, put in the ear buds, and that is when the real problems began.
What am I supposed to do?  Relax and mediate.  Keep my eyes open without blinking?   I am still seeing all these blurry things.  
Should I keep my eyes fixed or move them around?
All the while I’m thinking there is no way this is going to work.
People will be bored before anything happens.
An idea occurs to me as I’m writing this.
Maybe I could use bi or tricolored LEDs to make the hue change slowly, just to give them something to reduce boredom without taking anything away from the ganzfeld induction process.
So after a few minutes, I’m thinking that there are too many problems and this will not work, etc.
I persist for around 5 minutes when I do start to notice that the color (which is sort of yellow) is starting to wash out and the light seems to be dimming.
I wonder if maybe there were other reasons that this thing ended up in surplus, like maybe it burns out really fast!
Then I blink and the light comes back to full intensity, but only for a moment.
I’m happy!  Even with all the problems I’m still getting the first stages of ganzfeld.
Now how long do I need to wait to see a horse ridden by a knight in shining armor coming out of the fog?  
(one of the subjects in the Cortex paper saw that!)
About 30 minutes later I’m still waiting for my knight to show up and all I’m seeing is the lights dimming and then brightening and then dimming again.
After 30 minutes, 98% of subjects had some sort of visual imagery.
Either I’m the unlucky 2%, or the setup just isn’t good enough.

I give up on the plexiglass and go to plan B, which is to just put up a red screen on my laptop and put that up to my face.
The next surprise was that I actually can see some sort of pattern that looks like a fine grating, even with the screen an inch or two from my eyes!
This is sort of interesting.  I wonder if this is an effect that might be useful for some other project.
Anyway, I pull up photoshop and make a big red full screen image.
Then I turn up the pink noise and stick my face on the screen and wait.
I give up pretty fast because it doesn’t seem to be dimming, and the gratings are sort of grating, maybe the patterns are even worse than the plexiglass scratches.

I really want this thing to produce a ganzfeld effect as quickly as possible, so I’m going to have to think about making the purest, most uniform, visual field possible.
Maybe playing with the color and intensity of the field can even help it to happen faster, or maybe that would delay it?
I may have to go with a sound based installation, and just focus on making the best visual ganzfeld I can without any monitor.
That would be easier, but I still feel that I could, if I do it very subtly and carefully, influence the visual imagery, and that would be so cool that I’m not ready to let go of it yet.

I looked into other edge lit plexiglass things.  
Sure enough, you can carve on the surface to make it light up, so those photons will go straight through unless they hit some sort of imperfection.
I’ve seen these things before with lettering and pictures in gift shops, so I should have known it.
I do searches for edge lit plexiglass, etc.
There is some stuff called endlighten (almost a good name) that is plexiglass with some sort of “pixie dust” in it so that it puts out a uniform light field.
Looks cool, and I think I’d like the person who designed it.
It seems to be only custom order, e.g. expensive.
I go over to good old TAP plastics to see what they have and don’t find much.
I also search for switchable window tint things.
These are mostly liquid crystals that you can electrically change the polarization properties, just like in an LCD screen.
They go from clear to high opacity at the flick of a switch.
The question is: can I adjust them to be somewhat transparent?
There is an evaluation kit on ebay for $60 that might be big enough for what I want.
Maybe a fixed translucent or semi-transparent glass would be good enough?
I need something that does not blur light from the screen, but would still reflect a blurry and uniform image from the other side.
I’m reminded of the Eno exhibit I saw at the Exploratorium.  He had these amazing displays with very saturated colors on paper sculptures.  When I looked through the corner, I found one that I could see he had a big old TV monitor underneath that had bars of slowly changing colors that were being reflected off the paper.
The colors on the paper were so much more saturated, smooth, and glowing than anything I’ve seen coming off a monitor like that directly.
So maybe I could have a half silvered glass or plexiglass and put paper as a reflective diffuser on the side of the glass facing the person.
Some LEDs would light up the paper that would then reflect and diffuse back into the half mirror.
I could test this by using a piece of regular mirror, then take a piece of white paper and cut eyeholes in it.   Illuminate the paper with a red light.
Obviously this will not work because I’ll see my own eyes in the mirror, again Duhhh!
Say I tilt the mirror so I see the reflection of the area just above my head, then I can put my nice smooth white paper there and light it up uniformly.
Might work, or might be something obvious I’m missing…
I’ll try it this evening or tomorrow if I have time.

Again with the mini-meta-note:
I think writing is helping because this morning I was so depressed that things didn’t work out in the first experiment I was thinking of not writing anything at all.
Then after that all-important huge cup of coffee that makes me feel like I can do almost anything, I started writing anyway and started to see the humor, and got some perspective on the process.
This is making it a little less of a slog to get through the critical (and all so in-vogue) failure stage
(I hope it is just a stage, anyway).








