I will start by just collecting ideas for how to implement this thing without any constraints on
space, money, coherence or sensibility.
In later posts, I'll attempt to select ideas that work well together and are relatively practical.

What I propose is to start with a truely empty space: pitch dark, deafeningly quiet (anechoic).
Into this emptiness will be regular injections of sound and image mixtures that are hard to percieve consciously, 
but have strong subliminal content.
The sounds and images could include mixtures and loops of talking at different speeds (and fading in and out)
from current very diverse podcasts, art/science educational videos, short funny video loops, 
classic movies, and a wide range of music.
The visuals will include dense overlays of words and pictures and video that are all panning and zooming slowly 
and independently.
An array of speakers will create a similarly diffuse but dynamically moving sound scape.
There will be times of complete darkness and quiet.
Then there will be other sudden moments of intense sounds and images, enough to create a startle or adrenilin response.
The video sound tracks may be offset from the visual content.

One trick is to present a bright small spot at the start of one of the image barages that will force the viewer to look at that point.
Then the left and right visual fields can be stimulated separately with a rapid sequence of images that will go separately to verbal vs non-verbal brain hemispheres.

When presented with this field of sound and images, the unconscous mind may pick out the pieces it needs, 
even if they are not actually present in the mix.


The physical layout of the space would be a very tall conicle screen with a radius at the bottom of 8 feet.
Surrounding the cone would be the anecoic chamber with an enterance and exit that are baffled for light and sound.
On the floor of the cone there are radial couches that you can crawl into.
The foot of the couch would have a small screen that indicates if that couch is empty 
and have simple instructions to crawl in.
This screen would be invisible once you are in the cone.
The participant's heads will come together in the center of the floor, and would be raised slightly on pillows to allow viewing the screen,
and also allow people to get inside the intimate zone of their neighbor's social space without having to see them.
One possibility would be to make small blinds (or screens) between the participants so that they can not see each other, or they see an avitar.
Also it could be arranged so that they participants hand's would naturally fall into the space where they could touch.
There could be other interesting objects and textures to feel and manipulate in these shared touch areas.

Some of the images would be primal and hypnotic such as slow motion fire, snow falling, slow motion ocean waves breaking.
The sounds may be shuffled so that the ocean wave has the sound of fire and vice-versa.

Smells would be released into the cone sometimes during periods of silence and darkness.
These would include the smell of fire, pie baking, ocean, pine trees and leaves decomposing.
(these smells would be from real sources - so there would be an oven with a slowly baking pie made fresh every day)
Smells trigger very deep memories, feelings, and appetites.

The participant couch could include sensors for skin conductance, breathing, body and head movement.
This feedback would allow the system to either go deeper in the current directions, or change to another.
To know if the person is bored and is ready for stimulation.
Gradually the periods of non-stimulation could be made longer as the participants can tolerate it.
It will also include a tablet that is held at an angle above and behind the head so you can see and touch it by looking up.
The tablet will also have speech recognition, the words may be used as seeds for the images, videos and sounds.
The tablet may also show words or pictures that they participant could touch to direct or seed the flow.

