Last night I tried a fairly long session using a paper mask as described in the instructables article.
I did see patterns of fog/blankness moving medial to lateral in both eyes.
I also started to see some abstract structures forming, but still no real hallucinations.
Part of the problem may be that I have a lot of floaters in my eyes, so even with the uniform illumination, I’m still getting moving contrast edges from those.
Still, this is hard.  I can see why it is not that popular.
I decided to take a different tact and look at random video noise.
I made an openframeworks app that displayed full screen video noise.
I found that especially with just noise in the red channel alone, I was seeing lots of interesting patterns of optical flow.

Several papers I’ve read stress the importance of a very uniform field.
I looked in Edmonds for diffusers, and found some that were not too expensive.
I ordered a couple of red EL panels from adafruit.
Those should be pretty uniform, and maybe better than using a diffuser.

Today I’m going back to the literature and broadening my search.
I found a few interesting papers:

Perceptual “Blankout” of Monocular Homogeneous Fields (Ganzfelder) is Prevented with Binocular Viewing
Stanley J Bowanowski Jr and Robert W Doty
Center for Brain Research, University of Rochester Medical School
Vision Res. Vol 27, No. 6, pp 967-982, 1987

In this paper, they are getting a really fast (less than 1 minute!) “blankout” by covering one eye, and stimulating the other eye with ganzfeld. 
They show that if you bring up the luminance in the other eye, the effect is greatly reduced and takes longer.
When the eyes were given the same uniform illumination, they didn’t get the effect at all after 10-20 minutes.
Also interesting that their subjects described the blankout as going from medial to lateral, but never fully blanking out the area at the outside edge.
This is the same with retinal stabilized images (either the eye is physically prevented from moving, or a mirror attached to the eye moves the image so that it is fixed on the retina).
This area of the visual field is not binocular because the other eye does not cover it.
Their claim is that the ganzfeld effect is due to binocular rivalry/suppression where the covered eye becomes dominant, suppressing the ganzfeld eye.
If that were true, then people without stereopsis might have a reduced ganzfeld effect.
That would make a nice experiment that I haven’t seen in the literature.
Anyway, I’ll have to try this out tonight and see if covering one eye helps.
A little strange that this idea is not anywhere but this one paper, but their methods seem sound.

Another paper seems to show a much faster induction of ganzfeld with longer wavelength and lower brightness, so a dim red field should be best.
￼(COLOR AND BRIGHTNESS FADE-OUT IN THE GANZFELD IS WAVELENGTH DEPENDENT, Mosrix GUR
Department of Biomedical Engineering, Technion, Israel Institute of Technology, 
Vision Res. Vol 29, No 10, pp 1335-1341, 1989)
Also saw in a different paper that red light might be better when there are inhomogenities in the field.



I read the EEG section of the first paper I found.
It is sort of interesting that they see a shift in the alpha frequency 30-60 seconds before hallucinations happen.
This makes me wonder if I could induce such a shift.
Even if I could, it may not be part of the cause, but only some epiphenomena.
Still interesting to consider.
So I started (with some trepidation) looking at the scientific literature on cortical oscillation entrainment.
I know the whole binaural beats thing is huge with the cracked-pot set.
Surprisingly, I found one very recent paper about binaural beats and creativity.

The impact of binaural beats on creativity
Susan A. Reedijk, Anne Bolders and Bernhard Hommel*
Institute for Psychological Research and Leiden Institute for Brain and Cognition, Leiden University, Leiden, Netherlands
Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, Nov 2013, Vol 7, Article 786

They found that they actually do increase creativity, but only in people with low dopamine (as measured using spontaneous eye-blink rate).
They down play it in the text, but when you look at the graphs, it is obvious that for most people binaural beats actually reduces creativity (as measured by alternate uses task)!
Also if the frequency difference is in the alpha or gamma band does not seem to matter much, so all this stuff about alpha waves may not be the cause.
Anyway, this seems like a dead end unless you have low dopamine.

A much more interesting recent paper about brain oscillation entrainment using MEG:

Speech Rhythms and Multiplexed Oscillatory Sensory Coding in the Human Brain
Joachim Gross1*, Nienke Hoogenboom2, Gregor Thut1, Philippe Schyns1, Stefano Panzeri1,3, Pascal Belin1, Simon Garrod1
1 Institute for Neuroscience and Psychology, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom, 2 Institute for Clinical Neuroscience and Medical Psychology, University of Du ̈sseldorf, Du ̈sseldorf, Germany, 3Center for Neuroscience and Cognitive Systems, Istituto Italiano di Tecnologia @UniTn, Rovereto, Italy
PLOS Biology, Dec. 2013, Vol 11, issue 12.

I’m going to have to read this one more carefully since it relates to my work.
(I have an fMRI experiment where people listen to a story.)
It seems to relate the levels of speech rhythms (prosody, syllables and phonemes) to frequencies of brain oscillations (delta, theta, gamma).
So edges in speech signals synchronize brain oscillations at different levels.
I wonder if this may be why poetry or rap lyrics are so effective.
Maybe instead of noise or binaural beats, I could use a mixture of repeated speech syllables.
I’m still thinking that I could trigger hallucinations of speech in a dense mixture of speech sounds.

Another idea that came from a paper about adapting to audio/visual delays would be to stimulate multimodal areas of the brain with visual events that are slightly offset from corresponding sound events.
You could do this by hemisphere by doing the offset only in one ear, or only in one visual field.

I had one practical idea.
If this installation comes together at all (BIG if at this point), then rather than having a bed where the visual part of the installation has to come down over your head, I could have a bed where you lay on your belly and view through a hole like they have on massage tables.
Less moving parts.

I small change to a previous idea:
If I’m going to use a beam splitter or half-silver mirror, I could just use a regular piece of glass and have the EL panels on backside of the glass.
Then I could reflect my computer display (of subtle influences) off the surface of the glass (which would reduce it’s intensity a lot, but that is good in this case).


