I read the article in Cortex.  
The visual field has to be very uniform.
This makes sense because the visual system will habituate to constant inputs, causing it to black out.
If there are any marks, dust, edges, etc. that would be a problem.
There are three basic setups shown in the article:

 


Setup c is the most common and the easiest technically because the ping-pong balls are so close to the eyes that you can’t focus on them.
There is also a nice article on instructables (of course!) that shows how to make a ganzfeld mask out of a piece of paper.
http://www.instructables.com/id/Ganzfeld-Hack-Your-Brain-the-Legal-Way
In this case as well, the “screen” is right in front of the eyes.

It would be great to be able to project on a screen as in setup a or b.
But what if the screen gets dirty?
I spend some time thinking about whether I could get a uniform field by using a webcam to monitor the screen and adjusting the image to cancel any imperfections.
In the end I think this is just too complicated.
It might work eventually, but it is a lot of effort when this is only one part of the piece, and what if after all that it didn’t work very well.

I have a feeling the uniformity has to be really good.
A mask or half ping-ping balls would just be too cumbersome for an installation like this.
There would be sanitary issues, or I would have to come up with a huge supply of disposable masks.
Also I just don’t want there to be any instructions.
Has there ever been an art piece with instructions?
I’d guess there has, since so many things have been done.
Still, I just think that takes away a lot from the art and makes it more of a science demo.
The instructions should be obvious.
There is a couch; you lay in it; end of story.

What I’m thinking about is a side-illuminated piece of plexiglass right in front the face.
It is too close to the eyes to focus on, so dirt may not be as much an issue.
If the illumination where LED or florescent (as on computer LCD screens), it would be easy to control by computer.
I could still project images on a screen farther away, and by balancing the illumination on the plexiglass, make things visible in as subtle a way as possible.

There is a huge question of whether I can display anything without disrupting the ganzfeld effect completely.
If it takes a while to establish the effect, I may not be able to really do as much stuff with a visually based game as I had been thinking.
One interesting thing in the Cortex paper was that they used the sound of a waterfall instead of white or pink noise because they found that subjects tolerated that better.
They mention that there was many examples of water related hallucinations and they conjecture that this was due to the sound.
So that may be my first evidence that you can guide or influence the ganzfeld induced hallucinations.
That also opens another possibility, which would be to get rid of the computer graphics, and just work with subtle manipulation of the soundscape.
This would be much easier, and right now that is a big plus.
The paper also shows that auditory hallucinations due occur (as well as tactile and kinesthetic, and even olfactory!).
 
So far my research in the scientific literature, and on the web, have found almost nothing about attempting to guide or manipulate the ganzfeld effect.
There are 3 possibilities: it has never been tried, it has been tried and it didn’t work, or (most likely) it was tried a little and didn’t work but it might work with enough experimentation.

There is a huge amount about using the effect for ESP or parapsychology.
It seems intuitively obvious that ganzfeld would increase the sensitivity of the mind to whatever influnces are out there.
In some part it is that same intuition that is driving this work except I’d like to see if it possible to make one more sensitive to the weak internal creative impulses.

That is interesting, and may even be a nice thing to have in the description of the piece to enhance the social aspect.

So I will have to start doing some research of my own.
It is time to start getting my hands dirty.
I have never tried the ganzfeld effect myself, and I’m a little nervous for a number of reasons.
This whole idea might turn out to be impossible.
Also the idea of hallucinating is a little scary.
In general there is always a queasy feeling when it comes time to make the jump from the comfort of being inside my head to the harsh, and less flexible real world.

The light artist James Turrell (who I really admire) has done some work with ganzfeld as art.
I also think some of the color field painters were playing on this effect.

Maybe make it a cave you have to crawl into, playing on the notion that the ancient Greeks would go into dark caves to get inspiration.


I’m liking the name ganzulator at this point.  It is retro-madscientist, geeky, silly, and also has no hits on google.


