Today I will try to unpack some of the ideas from yesterday.  This is still stream of consciousness at this point.  Hopefully in the process of explaining where each idea comes from, I will expand the number of ideas, creating an even bigger mess to work with later during a refinement day.

Sensory deprivation may be part of the creative process for some artists.  Maybe dark caves were used originally.   Many artists will go through phases of intense focus and reduced distractions.   Because sensory deprivation, ganzfield, and similar techniques have been around for a long time, I can safely assume that they are not that effective by themselves for enhancing creativity.  If they were, then a lot more people would be using them now.  Even if they were difficult or unpleasant, that would not stop some artists from using them regularly.  There are a few artists who use mediation and dreaming as a core of their work (e.g. David Lynch).  So there is something there, but the effect must be weak, and/or require a lot of work to utilize.  How can we increase this effect?

How does sensory deprivation work?  I can make some of the usual obvious guesses, since it doesn’t seem like there has been much scientific study using neuroimaging at this point (only 385 articles in pubmed, and nothing with fmri). Sensory deprivation allows the mind an open field to fill-in its own perceptions, ideas and feelings.  The process of filling-in is a very basic part of how the brain works.  We do not see the blind spot in our visual field except under specific conditions.  The concept of filling-in is really not right, since the function of the brain is not to create a pixel level image of the world.  The brain parses the world into abstract representations at a higher level where filling-in is just a by-product.  This happens at a conceptual as well as perceptual level in that ideas are parsed in terms of our knowledge and biases, we fill-in by making assumptions.  Because of all the feedback loops, higher-level representations do influence lower levels.   If there is no lower level input, then everything is determined by higher level activity and noise.   Does this help to have brain states that are outside the usual paths?  In itself, I’d guess not, and this may be why sensory deprivation by itself is not that often used to increase creativity.

One common mechanism in the brain is to adjust the gain based on the level of input.  So when there is a lot of input, at some point there is habituation to keep the system from overloading.  When there is very little input, the system becomes more sensitive in an attempt to pull out smaller signals from the noise.  

During normal waking, unconscious or subconscious ideas are a very weak signal that is easily drowned out.  Turning up the gain and reducing inputs may help to pull these signals out.

Are ideas that come from the unconscious mind more creative?  At this point I’m assuming this is true.  There has not been enough scientific study of the relationship between creativity and sensory deprivation, dreaming, the unconscious, even though many artists claim to tap into unconscious for their inspiration.

Dreams are a random walk in the association structure of the mind with very little plasability monitoring.   Francis Crick has an interesting theory of dreaming as a way to unlearn and forget associational trails/paths that would otherwise become obsessive associational gutters that we would easily fall into.  


Is there a technological way that we could make it easier to gain access to our unconscious mind for the purpose of creating ideas?  Even if not related to the unconscious, can we manipulate things to increase the chances of jumping to brain states that are not on the beaten path, but are still interesting?


Any system with a lot of feedback loops and variable gain will tend to oscillate out of control unless there is some significant countervailing inhibition.  The brain is structured around local inhibitory interneurons (mostly using GABA) that may serve many functions including preventing epileptic seizures, but also making competitive winner-take-all networks that select from alternative possibilities.   This may be a very deep key to the way we think.  The brain may be organized in a categorical, or diametrical way.  We think it terms of things being X or not X (or the opposite of X).  It is leveraging from the statistical anti-correlations found in the world, to generate context specific prior probabilities.  Art is often working against these worldly biases, and considering things like X and not X.  

Is there a way we can lower the barriers a little bit by crafting a simulation sequence or environment?

Cells in the brain have different temporal response characteristics.  Some adapt more quickly than others to reduced or increased levels of input.  I would assume that a lot of the inhibitory networks adapt more quickly since keeping the brain safe from seizure is a high priority.  
Another thread is impulse response.  We can characterize a system at a fairly deep level by the way it responds to a single very fast pulse input.  The reason is an infinitely narrow pulse contains all frequencies.   Perhaps by some combination and timing of reduced input, and pulses that echo through the system, we could speed up the rate of unconscious or creativity generators.  There is also the concept of resonance.  My hitting the system with another pulse while it is on an upswing we can increase the energy in selected modes to very high levels.   Strobes or flashing at certain frequencies can create hallucinations.  These are generally very unpleasant, but in very small doses could be better tolerated. 
A lot of these ideas may not work (at all), but if they do it may only be in a very narrow range of parameters that is tuned to the individual, and may need to be adjusted over time.
Yesterdays rambling were mostly along the lines a passive system (except at the end).    Clearly there has to be a lot of feedback from the participants, so it would need to be more interactive.  Things like skin conductance may be good indirect measures of emotion or discomfort, but it is hard to know a positive from a negative response.  We might need something more direct like a set of knobs the participant can use to rate things like discomfort.  Maybe there is a button to press when you feel more open to a creative idea.  Or maybe it could be operationalized with a game where you have to hidden images, which involves a certain amount of creativity, or seeing things differently.   (e.g. painting “Hide and Seek” that I had on the wall as an undergrad and on some days I would see new people in it that I hadn’t seen in the previous months of looking)

I like the concept of making an art piece that is also a scientific experiment.  It collects data about how people respond to a range of stimulus sequences that can be analyzed later gain a deeper understanding.  This off-line process can be used to adjust the on-line system to optimize the parameters of interest in real-time.






