I have written a simple openFrameworks program to test out some to the stimulus paradigms.  Hopefully tonight IÕll get a chance to see if this works with the one-eye technique.  The program will produce low-level auditory and visual noise with bursts of pulsed stimulation at the alpha frequency at regular intervals.  There is a progression of pulses starting with ones at the low end of alpha, then gradually ramped up into the higher range, as seems to occur during visual imagery.  It stays at the high end for several pulse periods before restarting the whole progression. I know from some of the papers IÕve read that I can entrain the alpha rhythm with these stimuli.  I also know that the entrainment actually lasts for a few seconds after the stimulus.  My hope is that I can manipulate the alpha frequency and also have periods of ganzfeld for the echoes to play out in some sort of imagery.  There are a lot of parameters here, and a lot of guessing, and a lot of finger crossing.For visual stimulation IÕm starting with flickering checkerboard.  This is a standard neuroimaging paradigm that strongly activates visual areas.  I think that more recent studies are showing that higher visual areas are more sensitive to curves, especially ones with points of higher curvature as these are the most informative for outline identification of objects.   At some point I should get a little fancier with this.For auditory stimulation, IÕm just using noise bursts at this point.  I downloaded some precision pink 1/f noise.  I like the idea of 1/f just because it is so pervasive. My plan is to add tactile stimulation using cellphone ringer motors and/or big bass speakers near the hands.I have also been considering vestibular stimulation by putting the bed on a pivot so I can do slight tilting vibrations.IÕve been rethinking the whole installation.  All my previous installations have centered on interactivity.  I like interactivity because it is an easy way to maintain audience engagement.  It is also a new artistic domain making it relatively easy to do something that has never been done.  Maybe IÕve been trying to shoehorn that into this installation in part because that is what IÕm used to doing, and also it is outside my comfort zone to do without it.  Since IÕm going outside my comfort zone in several respects (including writing my usually internal process here), why not continue in that direction.The overall presentation is important, not only because it is always important, but also because this piece will not be effective without the right mindset, beliefs and expectations.  I have generally tried hard to make my tech-art look as non-tech as possible.  The piece is not about the technology; it is about the process induced in the audience.  The usual appearance of technological objects is a distractor.  It is hard enough to keep people from going in that direction since technology in itself is so attractive, and has so many preconceptions and connotations.  With this installation it would be all too easy to go full-on mad scientist.   And that might be fun!   But I will start by considering the opposite approach.The piece is about open-mindedness to new ideas and creativity.   It is about looking into the void in a contemplative mode.  It is about listening to that weak inner voice that we usually ignore because it says so many strange things.  The presentation of this piece should reflect all of this.  It needs to be very low-key, yet very different.Darkness and quiet are a important.  At least having a dark curtain surrounding the piece, if not a dark room.  All elements of the piece would be black as well.  There may need to be a guide to help people get into the piece.  The guide should always whisper to maintain the attitude of silence.  My current thinking would be to have massage beds that the participants would lay in on their belly.  The visual and auditory stuff would be built into head holder.  The bed could be low to the ground to make them less like massage beds, and also to reduce the risk of falling off.  I would like to improve the head holder, since IÕve always found them uncomfortable.  The pressure on my sinuses always causes them to fill up.  IÕd like the head holder to just have a very soft support of the forehead and the chin.  IÕm sure there will be issues here to work out.  There may need to be user adjustments to keep most of the weight supported by the body, not the head.  Also the bed should have side walls that are also pillow-soft.  The room itself should be cool, and then bed should be warmed with heating pads on all sides.  (maybe the heat will be a reminder that you are using a bed that was just used by someone else, that maybe negative for some people.  In general, may need to deal with sanitary issues, for example replacing a soft sheet liner for each person?)I could go with something where you lay on your back and then slide your head into a cylinder.  I think that may be too much like an MRI, or maybe just not different enough.   It seems more medical, which is not going to help people relax.In a more advanced version, I was thinking of having the beds be vertical, and with structurally strong side walls around the 4 sides.  More like a coffin.  The participant would walk on to the bottom wall of the box.  Then the whole thing would pivot to a horizontal position.  It would have to be very slow and solid feeling so that it would feel like you are floating, but held securely.  A lot of issues here including dealing with differences in people/children heights.  