Looking over the previous two posts, I’m wondering if my decision to just put my process out there in such a raw form was a good one.
Certainly I will come off as somewhat crazy (hopefully in a good way), since most everything we read has been very highly edited, processed, etc.
It is funny that the raw thoughts of the most sane person (not saying I am that person) would most likely be judged this way because we routinely hide our internal insanity by filtering, monitoring and post-processing before we present it to the outside world.
Risk taking can be an important part of the artistic process, so be it.

Reading the previous post, two things occur to me.
The first is that this whole idea hinges on the temporal properties of different neuronal systems being different enough to be manipulated this way.
Today I will do some literature searches about this.
The other thing is whether this has turned from being an art piece into being a scientific experiment.
There is tension here at the boundary, and maybe that is a good thing.
There is definitely an artistic aspect to the process of scientific research.
Also some of the visualizations could be seen as art.
(I have shown one of the brain activation movies that I made at work in a gallery a while back.  It was not my plan, but the gallery owner was showing an interactive video piece I made and asked about my work.  I showed her the movie and she wanted to show that as well.  The movie showed brain activations as people listened to a story, and you could hear the story and see the words at the same time.)
My hope is to make something that is art in the sense that it changes the way that we see the world, and allows us to find something new inside ourselves.

Now back to our regularly scheduled post.

I’ve been thinking about the interactive aspect of this piece.  
Whereas before it was sort of an add-on at the end, now I’m seeing that it is a central part.
Play and creativity are intimately connected.
Harnessing the power of play will be the killer app of the future.
Right now it is still in a very primitive state since the elements of video games do not mesh well with the elements of educational programs, making things very clunky.
Eventually I think gamification will extend beyond education into other domains and endeavors. 
This piece is an example of the gamification of creativity. 
It is starting to focus on the interface of play and creativity using technology.
For this piece it is important to engage the participant over a reasonably long period of time, and play is the best way to do that.
There is also the commitment of laying down in the couch or pod or whatever, since there is a physical energy barrier to getting back up.
If they are just being blasted with stimulation and then dropped into emptiness, it will be very hard to tolerate.
If there was a game involved, that could help to distract the conscious mind.
When I watch people playing games on the bus or subway, and I watch my wife spend hours playing solitaire, I think this is not about winning.   
This is about distraction from thought, and mediation.
Listening to music, watching TV, reading books, these are all ways to turn off the flow of consciousness that can become grating mostly because of its loopy repetitiveness.  
We think about the same things over and over even though we have already thought them out as far as we can.
I think one of the functions of the brain is to prevent being caught in endless and pointless loops.  Boredom is painful.
That may be part of the reason that sensory deprivation is so unpleasant, or that solitary confinement makes people go crazy.
So I need to give them something to focus on.  Something fun.
It has to be very simple, and obvious.
I like the game element of fitting pieces together (e.g. tetris).
(Tetris has been used lately in a few studies where it seems that it may help reduce PTSD if you do it very soon after the trama.  Also I’ve used a stripped down tetris as a task for fMRI at work.)
Symbolically it fits with the concept of the whole piece: putting together things in a novel/creative way.
How to square sensory deprivation with having some game going on that is clearly sensory?
Maybe the game becomes more difficult because sometimes it is hard to see.
The level of contrast or image noise could be used to make it so that the person is working at the limit of their perception.
It would be easy to adjust the contrast/noise so they can just barely see what they are doing based on if they are still moving the objects toward each other.
When things are at the limits of perception, it is easier to see things that are not really there. 
That is what we want!
Maybe they come from the unconscious, or from higher level representations in the brain.
Combining this with very brief bursts of subliminal pictures and words to seed things might be the right direction.

I would love to integrate eye tracking into this piece. 
(Does google glass have eye tracking?  I’m sure it will if it doesn’t.)
They could move the objects by looking at them. 
(This would be good because I’d rather not have any touch/motor stuff.)
Maybe the objects have sounds associated with them that you hear with you look at them.
The sounds could be related or unrelated to matching the pieces together.
I’d guess this would not be practical for a piece with this sort of timeline.


The pieces they are putting together could be geometric shapes that contain videos of things that are extremely different semantically.
I’ve been thinking about somehow using semantic vector spaces (such as LSA) in this piece.
Using feedback (such as how long they look at things) the piece could semi-randomly walk in the space of concepts in a direction that is influenced by the participant.
At the same time it could find semantic elements that are totally orthogonal to connect to ones being selected.


Just to get practical for a second, here is my current implementation idea since it has changed a lot from the first post.
There would be separate pods/couches that could be placed close together (important for the social atmosphere – will discuss later).
There would be no anechoic chamber and huge conical screen since these would be big and expensive, and would not give enough individual control for what I’m thinking now.
Each pod would have its own large screen directly above the head and its own projector (could be small and low power).
Maybe the area around the ears could be made into a mini-anechoic area, or I guess they could have big isolating headphones – though I like that idea less.
They could just be speakers that pump out white noise at a low level to mask any sounds, except during bursts they could have thickly layered voices or sounds.
If we don’t have eye tracking (which may be a bit much to ask for) then I’d need some sort of touch controls in the hand area.









 
